# Linkerd RFCs

Many changes, including bug fixes and documentation improvements can be
implemented and reviewed via the normal GitHub pull request workflow. However,
some changes are "substantial" and we ask that these be put through a bit of a
design process to produce a consensus among the Linkerd community.

The "RFC" (request for comments) process is intended to provide a consistent and
controlled path for contributions to enter the project, so that all stakeholders
can be confident about the project direction and maintainability of the
codebase.

## When you need to follow this process

[when you need to follow this process]: #when-you-need-to-follow-this-process

You need to follow this process if you intend to make "substantial" changes to
Linkerd2 (Linkerd2-proxy, Linkerd Control Plane) or the RFC process itself. What
constitutes an "substantial" is a foundational concern for the Linkerd project.

Similarly, any technical effort (refactoring, major architectural change) that
will impact a large section of the development community should also be
communicated widely. The Linkerd RFC process is suited for this even if it will
have zero impact on the typical user or operator.

## Before creating an RFC

[before creating an rfc]: #before-creating-an-rfc

A hastily-proposed RFC can hurt its chances of acceptance. Low quality
proposals, proposals for previously-rejected features, or those that don't fit
into the near-term roadmap, may be quickly rejected, which can be demotivating
for the unprepared contributor. Laying some groundwork ahead of the RFC can make
the process smoother.

Although there is no single way to prepare for submitting an RFC, it is
generally a good idea to pursue feedback from other project developers
beforehand, to ascertain that the RFC may be desirable; having a consistent
impact on the project requires concerted effort toward consensus-building.

The most common preparations for writing and submitting an RFC include talking
the idea over on our [Linkerd Slack, #contributors](https://slack.linkerd.io),
or discussing the topic on our [CNCF developer mailing
list](https://lists.cncf.io/g/cncf-linkerd-dev). You may file issues on this
repo for discussion, but these are not actively looked at by the teams.

As a rule of thumb, receiving encouraging feedback from long-standing project
developers is a good indication that the RFC is worth pursuing.

## What the process is

[what the process is]: #what-the-process-is

To get a major feature added to Linkerd, one must get the RFC merged into the
RFC repository in either one or two steps.

First, the problem statement should be completed. If one does not intend to
design or implement the RFC, then the proposal can be merged as is after going
through reviews.

Second, the design proposal is completed. Once the design is accepted, the RFC
is considered active and may be implemented with the goal of eventual inclusion
into Linkerd.

If one intends to state the problem and propose a design, then both sections can
be completed in a single review.

### Step 1

1. Fork the [RFC repository](https://github.com/linkerd/rfc)
2. Copy `0000-rfc-template.md` to `problem/0000-my-contribution.md` (where
   "my-contribution" is descriptive.).
3. Fill in the RFC. Leave `Design Proposal` section for `Step 2` if you do not
   intend to propose a design, or would like to first gather feedback on the
   problem.
4. If completing RFC in separate steps, submit a pull request. As a pull request
   `Problem statement` will receive feedback from the larger community, and the
   author should be prepared to revise it in response.

### Step 2

1. Move `problem/0000-my-contribution.md` to `design/0000-my-contribution.md`.
2. Fill in the `Design proposal` section. Put care into the details: RFCs that
   do not present convincing motivation, demonstrate lack of understanding of
   the design's impact, or are disingenuous about the drawbacks or alternatives
   tend to be poorly-received
3. Submit a pull request. As a pull request `Design proposal` will receive
   feedback from the larger community, and the author should be prepared to
   revise it in response.

### Note

- If you have not already gathered feedback on the problem, it is advised to
  complete the process in two steps; it is better to ensure the problem needs to
  be solved before spending time on the design.
- Each pull request will be labeled with the most relevant reviewer, who will
  lead its triage.
- Build consensus and integrate feedback. RFCs that have broad support are much
  more likely to make progress than those that don't receive any comments. Feel
  free to reach out to the RFC assignee in particular to get help identifying
  stakeholders and obstacles.
- The team will discuss the RFC pull request, as much as possible in the comment
  thread of the pull request itself. Offline discussion will be summarized on
  the pull request comment thread.

RFCs rarely go through this process unchanged, especially as alternatives and
drawbacks are shown. You can make edits, big and small, to the RFC to clarify or
change the design, but make changes as new commits to the pull request, and
leave a comment on the pull request explaining your changes. Specifically, do
not squash or rebase commits after they are visible on the pull request.

## The RFC life-cycle

[the rfc life-cycle]: #the-rfc-life-cycle

Once an RFC becomes "active" then authors may implement it and submit the
feature as a series of pull requests to the Linkerd2 repo. Being "active" is not
a rubber stamp, and in particular still does not mean the feature will
ultimately be merged; it does mean that in principle all the major stakeholders
have agreed to the feature and are amenable to merging it.

Furthermore, the fact that a given RFC has been accepted and is "active" implies
nothing about what priority is assigned to its implementation, nor does it imply
anything about whether a maintainer has been assigned the task of implementing
the feature. While it is not _necessary_ that the author of the RFC also write
the implementation, it is by far the most effective way to see an RFC through to
completion: authors should not expect that other project developers will take on
responsibility for implementing their accepted feature.

Modifications to "active" RFCs can be done in follow-up pull requests. We strive
to write each RFC in a manner that it will reflect the final design of the
feature; but the nature of the process means that we cannot expect every merged
RFC to actually reflect what the end result will be at the time of the next
major release.

In general, once accepted, RFCs should not be substantially changed. Only very
minor changes should be submitted as amendments. More substantial changes should
be new RFCs, with a note added to the original RFC. Exactly what counts as a
"very minor change" is up to the team to decide.

## Implementing an RFC

[implementing an rfc]: #implementing-an-rfc

Some accepted RFCs represent vital features that need to be implemented right
away. Other accepted RFCs can represent features that can wait until some
arbitrary developer feels like doing the work. Every accepted RFC has an
associated issue tracking its implementation in the Linkerd2 repository; thus
that associated issue can be assigned a priority via the triage process that the
team uses for all issues in the Linkerd2 repository.

The author of an RFC is not obligated to implement it. Of course, the RFC author
(like any other developer) is welcome to post an implementation for review after
the RFC has been accepted.

If you are interested in working on the implementation for an "active" RFC, but
cannot determine if someone else is already working on it, feel free to ask
(e.g.by leaving a comment on the associated issue).

### Help this is all too informal

[help this is all too informal!]: #help-this-is-all-too-informal

The process is intended to be as lightweight as reasonable for the present
circumstances. As usual, we are trying to let the process be driven by consensus
and community norms, not impose more structure than necessary.

## License

[license]: #license

This repository is currently licensed under:

- Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  <http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)>
- <https://github.com/linkerd/linkerd2/blob/master/LICENSE>

### Contributions

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.
